---
layout: post
title: The Many Faces of Bitcoin
date: 2018-04-10
categories: Bitcoin
author: [Adam Tache, Murad Mahmudov]
excerpt: To nocoiners, gold-bugs, and Keynesians, the cryptocurrency space is best seen as a parasite infecting millennials with technobabble, forcing them to spout economic gibberish, and sucking them into believing the pipedream that a crypto-anarchist society could exist.
---
The most prominent and powerful of the cryptocurrency communities — the Bitcoin
community — has fractured into multiple factions based on desires for various
directions to take the protocol and tribalism over different projects
altogether. This article will explain some of the current motives driving these
ideologies and try to express the reasoning behind this schism.

Although this article will be split into four main sections, there is certainly
some overlapping thought between individuals who espouse these theories. The two
schools of thought which we outline initially — bitcoin, first and foremost, as
a store of value, and bitcoin cash as digital cash — are typically considered
more mainstream, whereas the last two — Bitcoin as catalyst for something John
Nash called “Ideal Money,” leading to bitcoin-backed fiat currencies, and
finally, looking at Bitcoin from the perspective of information theory and
computation — are less commonly known.

### **Four Theories About Bitcoin**

Bitcoin was the first decentralized cryptocurrency ever created. It was released
in 2009 as the culmination of nearly three decades of discourse on the key
concepts within the [cypherpunk](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cypherpunk)
community. It was
[cited](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=342.msg4508#msg4508) by the
anonymous founder(s) Satoshi Nakamoto to be inspired by
[Bitgold](https://unenumerated.blogspot.com/2005/12/bit-gold.html) by [Nick
Szabo](http://unenumerated.blogspot.com/2017/02/money-blockchains-and-social-scalability.html)
and [B-Money](http://www.weidai.com/bmoney.txt) by [Wei
Dai](http://www.weidai.com/), two earlier attempts by well-known members at
creating functional electronic currency.

Most individuals within the Bitcoin community envision an endgame where an
implementation of Bitcoin will be a massively adopted cryptocurrency that is
both a store of value and a medium of exchange. They see bitcoin eventually
being the predominant global currency. However, the ideology then diverges
sharply on how this can be accomplished, and which priorities should take
precedence along the way.

#### First Theory: **BTC as a tamper-proof store of value.**

**Tenets:** Sound Money. Set-in-stone monetary policy. Full-node affordability.
Sovereign-grade censorship-resistance. Maximized decentralization and security.

Individuals that fall within the Bitcoin-as-sound-money camp generally believe
BTC is the only legitimate cryptoasset, with everything else ranging from being
entirely useless at best to blatant scams at worst. Commonly called Bitcoin
Maximalists, they desire “sound money” by the Austrian Economic School
definition, that cannot be inflated away or be at risk of confiscation, as the
case was in 1933 when [Executive Order
6102](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_6102), issued by Franklin D.
Roosevelt, made ownership of gold illegal in the United States.

These individuals believe that, for the foreseeable future, the goal of the
Bitcoin project isn’t to facilitate the buying of coffee, but to become
“high-powered” money, an even better form of gold. They claim it to be a digital
asset superior to physical gold due to a truly limited supply and more
deflationary emission. They also claim that, if used properly, it is unseizable,
unhackable, arbitrarily unprintable, and is an attempt to engineer a superior
form of money. Bitcoin is often discussed as a [settlement
network](http://nakamotoinstitute.org/mempool/economics-of-bitcoin-as-a-settlement-network/)
where the raw block space is not meant to facilitate small-value individual
transactions. It is believed, rather, that its usage is for settling
transactions of a larger value, where fees are less of an issue. This would
likely include once-in-a-while settlement transactions of secondary payment
solutions, for example, settling millions of Lightning Network payments in one
finalizing transaction on the blockchain.

Although there are many brilliant concepts that were first brought together in
Bitcoin, many Bitcoin Maximalists believe the mining difficulty adjustment may
be the most ingenious, as it allows for true digital scarcity that is tied to
the external, physical world. [Saifedean Ammous](https://twitter.com/saifedean)
is one of the most vocal and prominent BTC Maximalists, and in his new book,
[The Bitcoin
Standard](https://www.amazon.com/Bitcoin-Standard-Decentralized-Alternative-Central/dp/1119473861/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1523228272&sr=8-1&keywords=the+bitcoin+standard),
he states that it is Bitcoin’s high [stock-to-flow
ratio](http://goldstandardinstitute.net/2011/07/16/stock-to-flow-ratio-a-primer/)
coupled with its untamperable monetary policy that will eventually make it both
the most attractive and the most robust store of value.

As of now, most bitcoin holders insist on not spending, a common statement
being, “it would be foolish to spend when the price can still increase by a
factor of 100x or more.” Instead, many are hoarding the asset, which has become
known colloquially as
“[hodling](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=375643.0).” For them, hodling
is the main use case of Bitcoin during the time before the [Tipping
Point](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Tipping_Point). The positive feedback
loop of hodling and the price increasing encourages an ever-growing army of
hodlers. This army in turn collectively increase both the value of the asset and
the desirability to hoard it, as supply available on the market becomes
increasingly scarcer.

This logic is nicely illustrated by [Pierre
Rochard](http://nakamotoinstitute.org/mempool/the-bitcoin-central-banks-perfect-monetary-policy/)
in the diagram below to show that hoarding may create a positive feedback loop
to increase the BTC price, resulting in increased mining profitability, hashing
power, user adoption, and more.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Bitcoin Market Components</span>

Bitcoin Maximalists hold the opinion that the key element of Bitcoin is the
money it represents, rather than technology behind it. They cite Bitcoin’s
“perfect monetary policy” (illustrated in the graph below) combined with the
[Lindy Effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindy_effect) due to first-mover
advantage to explain why BTC will become and remain the dominant currency. The
caveat being: Bitcoin must maintain its status as a peer-to-peer, decentralized
system which produces a new block randomly, roughly every ten minutes. These
Bitcoin Maximalists believe that as long as this is done, eventually
[hyperbitcoinization](http://nakamotoinstitute.org/mempool/hyperbitcoinization/)
will occur, resulting in BTC being the dominant currency in existence.

In terms of monetary policy, Bitcoin Maximalists tend to believe that the
hyper-disinflationary total money supply of Bitcoin gives it the best monetary
policy of any existing asset, and fractional reserve banking is rotten to the
core. They prioritize saving and capital accumulation as opposed to superficial
consumption. They believe, in line with Austrian school economists, that
government meddling, especially with the money supply, causes malinvestment,
makes interest rates artificially low, and enriches a select few at the expense
of many.

Bitcoin Maximalists believe that bitcoin as sound money is to be accomplished
through maximizing both the collective and individual security within the
system. Currently, the Bitcoin blockchain is by far the most difficult to tamper
with of any cryptocurrency in existence, based on hashrate alone. As of April
2018, it is estimated that transactions in Bitcoin are currently secured by
confirmations from a network of computing power that produces over 29 exa-hashes
per second. This rate is estimated based upon the mining difficulty, which has
approximately
[tripled](https://bitinfocharts.com/comparison/bitcoin-hashrate.html) in the
last six months and has grown every year since the release of Bitcoin in 2009.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Bitcoin Hashrate (as of April 2018)</span>

Bitcoin Maximalists believe that the network hires miners to do one specific
job: mine the blocks that full nodes determine to be valid. Thus, they believe
users are in control of what Bitcoin validates, not miners. To facilitate this,
Bitcoin Maximalists emphasize that users should attempt to be self-sovereign by
controlling their own private keys and verifying their own transactions by
running [full nodes](https://bitcoin.org/en/full-node). By minimizing block size
and data stored on-chain, users can still manage to run full nodes even on
low-bandwidth connections. There are currently over [9000 reachable full
nodes](https://coin.dance/nodes) among over 100,000 total, which all store
copies of the Bitcoin blockchain.

Bitcoin Core is the most dominant open source project that uses the Bitcoin
protocol. The developers currently responsible for Bitcoin Core are primarily
focused on supporting the [Lightning Network](http://www.lightning.network/) and
other payment channels. They also support
[CoinJoin](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=279249.0) for privacy, and
are developing more support for side-chains as future second-layer or even
third-layer solutions for payments emerge,
[MAST](https://bitcointechtalk.com/what-is-a-bitcoin-merklized-abstract-syntax-tree-mast-33fdf2da5e2f),
and [Schnorr signatures and signature
aggregation](https://bitcoincore.org/en/2017/03/23/schnorr-signature-aggregation/)
in order to maximize how efficiently block space is used on the Bitcoin
blockchain. They are also looking into implementing [confidential
transactions](https://www.elementsproject.org/elements/confidential-transactions/investigation.html),
potentially using Blockstream’s [Elements
Project](https://www.elementsproject.org/elements/confidential-transactions/).
There is also a proposal to implement confidential transactions [as a
softfork](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2016-January/012194.html),
using segwit.

#### Second Theory: BCH as peer-to-peer Digital Cash

**Tenets:** Peer-to-peer, censorship-resistant, borderless cheap transfer of
value, without middlemen. High on-chain throughput and on-chain utility.
Set-in-stone monetary policy.

The members of the Bitcoin Cash community believe that Bitcoin should have
unrestricted block sizes in order to facilitate peer-to-peer payments without
bounds, and that Satoshi’s original intention was to create a peer-to-peer
electronic currency, as opposed to something like digital gold. They generally
cite the title and abstract of the Bitcoin
[whitepaper](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf) as proof of their correctness, as
well as Satoshi’s statements regarding a [phased-in
approach](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=1347.msg15366#msg15366) to
increase the block size, among other writings. These supporters generally
believe that the Bitcoin system should not be a settlement layer solely for
those who can afford to pay increasing fees, such as banks and other wealthy
entities. They are completely against that use case for technological and
ideological reasons, and they want to see most activity on-chain.

The implementation of Bitcoin that these individuals prefer is called Bitcoin
Cash. It aims to gain adoption as a medium of exchange before becoming a store
of value by keeping blocks large enough for nearly infinite transactions to take
place. It aims to allow all users to transact on-chain, including those who may
be underbanked or unbanked, some of whom earn as little as the equivalent of 2
dollars a day.

This Bitcoin fork to an alternate implementation was the result of increasingly
differing opinions on the technological and social directions the Bitcoin
community should head. One example is the disagreement between prominent
developers on the implementation of a protocol change implemented in February of
2016, referred to as replace-by-fee. Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash supporters clashed
on this point of contention: some siding with Mike Hearn’s [replace-by-fee
counterargument](https://medium.com/@octskyward/replace-by-fee-43edd9a1dd6d),
and some in favor of [0-confirmation
transactions](https://news.bitcoin.com/mini-pos-launches-zero-confirmation-bitcoin-cash-point-of-sale-terminal/)
to allow for instantaneous payments to maximize utility of Bitcoin, and allow it
to essentially be used the same as cash. The side in favor of bitcoin as cash
often cites Satoshi’s [vending
machine](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=423.msg3819#msg3819) example as
reasoning for this always being desirable within the system. Still, others
believe in researching alternative methods altogether instead of relying on
controversial 0-confirmation transactions.

Bitcoin Cash supporters believe that a cryptocurrency can only become the
dominant currency in existence if it is primarily used in a transactional
capacity. Therefore, instead of encouraging hoarding within the community, they
maintain that a certain percentage of an individual’s bitcoin cash should be
used for spending each month, and some encourage constantly replenishing the
spent BCHs. By doing this, they hope to encourage the adoption of Bitcoin Cash
as a payment system by incentivizing as many merchants as possible to accept the
currency. This seems to be rooted in a desire to smash the nation-state monopoly
on money and create a closed loop, with people earning bitcoin cash, spending
bitcoin cash, and merchants paying suppliers and employees bitcoin cash.

Bitcoin Cash chose not to add [segregated
witness](https://bitcoincore.org/en/2016/01/26/segwit-benefits/) to their
implementation and believe that full nodes that receive and validate
transactions but do not mine are irrelevant to the base security of the system.
Instead, they believe that hash power is the only thing that can determine the
direction of Bitcoin. They believe that miners are the only true full nodes:
serving as competing entities, forming a consensus state and generating new
blocks. They believe it is normal for large mining farms to arise in such a
system, and as supporting proof, they often cite Satoshi Nakamoto’s [server farm
post](http://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org/emails/cryptography/2/).

In “[Proof of Work as it relates to the theory of the
firm](https://nchain.com/en/blog/proof-work-relates-theory-firm/),” Bitcoin Cash
supporters describe the system as a multi-leader-follower Stackelberg game where
miners serve as rational actors controlling hash power. Under this type of
Stackelberg game, miners are to be in constant, non-cooperative competition with
each other to maximize profits by optimizing their efficiency in generating new
blocks by handling their quantity of hashrate.

In the medium-term
[roadmap](https://www.bitcoinabc.org/bitcoin-abc-medium-term-development),
Bitcoin Cash developers plan to re-enable certain scripts included in Bitcoin
transactions, known as op-codes, which would allow for more utility with smart
[contracts](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Contract). They want to launch
tokenization on-chain over the next year as an upgraded version of [Colored
Coins](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Colored_Coins), through a
[competition](https://coingeek.com/bitcoin-cash-bch-tokenization-contest-5-million-prize/)
for a five million pound prize. The goal being to both increase merchant
adoption of the cryptocurrency and consume alternative smart contract platform
use cases by unlocking the full ability of scripts in Bitcoin. They also plan on
launching on-chain privacy through [Oblivious
Transfers](http://www.livebitcoinnews.com/craig-wright-claims-bitcoin-cash-will-get-privacy-features-may-2018/).

A [paper](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3065857)
investigating Bitcoin Cash as infrastructure for internet commerce discusses
miners being divided into specific task groups without modifying the underlying
Bitcoin protocol. For example, processing nodes could reference a limited subset
of the blockchain, others could store the complete blockchain, others could be
for monitoring, and still others for propagating information. The paper also
introduced distributed autonomous corporations as systems that live on
additional layers to allow for more efficient information propagation. These
corporations could also be autonomously verified for integrity by third-parties.
The paper goes on to describe hypothetical fast payment networks which would
operate through on-chain assurance contracts for merchants to pay for
“preferentially propagated transactions,” and be operated by distributed
autonomous corporations. The paper also proposes that distributed autonomous
corporations could be used for double-spend monitoring to allow merchant
rejection of consumer payments within seconds, or in time for vending machine to
stop from releasing an item.

Bitcoin Cash supporters view it as more than a simple payment system; for
example, some view Bitcoin as a robust dual-stack [pushdown
automaton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pushdown_automaton) (2PDA) from the
alt-stack and main-stack present in the Bitcoin scripting language. As discussed
in this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M6j-11H2O7c) from a Bitcoin Cash
supporter conference, it is [hypothetically
possible](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3147440) that
Bitcoin can operate as a Universal Turing Machine, which means Bitcoin would
allow any computable functions to operate as a script executed on-chain. Some
computations, such as cellular automata, would require multiple transactions.

In another Bitcoin Cash
[paper](https://www.researchgate.net/project/Implementing-A-Church-Turing-Deutsch-Principle-Machine-on-a-Blockchain),
a Bitcoin Cash supporter states that an unbounded single-tape turing is
analogous to an unbounded blockchain, and can store a genetic algorithm that
will be able to provide Turing Complete results on any given mathematical
problem. Therefore, the paper posits, the eventual result of Bitcoin Cash will
be to create the Church-Turing-Deutsch Principle Machine, as described by David
Deutsch in his 1985
[paper](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~christos/classics/Deutsch_quantum_theory.pdf)
“Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and the universal quantum computer”
which states “every physical process can be simulated by a universal computing
device.”

***

#### Third Theory: **Bitcoin is a catalyst for John Nash’s Ideal Money**

**Tenets**: Apolitical store of value. Mining difficulty as solution to John
Nash’s theoretical Industrial Consumer Price Index. Idealized settlement layer
between central banks issuing their own currencies.

A niche number of individuals, the most prominent of whom posts under the names
Juice ([Medium](https://medium.com/@rextar4444)) and SoakerPatoshi
([Twitter](https://twitter.com/soakerpatoshi)), generally agree with the Bitcoin
Maximalist thesis that Bitcoin is likely to become the new modern Gold Standard,
and that it is likely that it becomes a massive, trillion-dollar asset. However,
they have a different view with respect to the endgame. This group believes that
even if bitcoin grows such that is surpasses the market cap of gold,
nation-state backed fiat currencies will nevertheless remain. Instead of causing
the collapse and disruption of that fiat money, Bitcoin will instead act as a
catalyst to force central banks to manage their fiat currencies in a more
responsible manner.

This possibility was initially thought of by [Hal
Finney](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hal_Finney_(computer_scientist)), who is
best known for being an early Bitcoin developer, being the first person to
transact with Satoshi Nakamoto, and being a developer of the secure
communication method known as Pretty Good Privacy. He
[posted](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=2500.msg34211#msg34211) on the
bitcoin forums his thoughts about hypothetical Bitcoin banks in 2010.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Hal Finney on Bitcoin Banks</span>

John Nash, a Nobel Prize economist who made significant contributions to game
theory such as the [Nash
Equilibrium](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nash_equilibrium) and [Bargaining
Problem](http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/cs286r/courses/spring02/papers/nash50a.pdf),
believed that although Keynesian economic policies were, in theory, intended to
be for solely noble objectives and general welfare of the people, in practice
these policies simply gave governments the ability to literally print money,
collecting seigniorage by way of inflation of the money supply. Nash often
likened Keynesians to Bolshevik Communists, as he saw that both groups gave
credence to the notions of a centrally managed system and a lack of transparency
surrounding decisions, especially with regards to the nation-state’s currency
issuance.

Nash wrote that by discussing inflation targeting, central banking officials are
essentially revealing that is possible to control inflation by controlling the
supply of money. Central banks, in their calculations, use a cost-of-living
index made up of domestic prices for goods in a given region of their
nation-state. Nash introduced a notion he called the Industrial Consumer Price
Index, or ICPI, which would provide an international standard for value
comparison of goods via a formula incorporating differing prices of goods in a
variety of locations.

Nash believed that a return to the Gold Standard was sub-optimal, because he
believed that technological changes would result in increasing unpredictability
of the future cost of gold production. He also considered the locations of gold
mines to not be “politically appealing” nor ideal, and that a return to the Gold
Standard would arbitrarily enhance the economic importance of those particular
areas.

Nash’s Ideal Money proposal, in a nutshell, is an idea that although we cannot
design a perfectly stable money, a money that approaches ‘stable’ would also
approach a limit that would be comparable to an optimally chosen basket of
commodity prices. While an ICPI would be a step on the path towards Nash’s
vision of an [Ideal Money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ideal_money), pegging a
currency to the ICPI is not a solution, as it could fluctuate with changes in
the supply or demand of commodities chosen for the index, thus necessitating an
adjustment process that would be prone to political pressure.

Currently, global reserve currencies face the [Triffin
Dilemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triffin_dilemma), resulting in a conflict
of interest between short-term domestic and long-term international objectives,
such as a desire to increase inflation to spur economic growth, versus keeping a
strong domestic currency with stability of purchasing power. Nash believed that
money would be stronger if it were put on a stage of competition where it must
compete to survive, and improve itself. Nowadays, however, currencies don’t
really compete in a typical way like that which results in better products over
time, but rather, they sometimes compete in a race to devalue. For Nash, rather
than focusing on the utility of money for everyday transactions, of paramount
importance was for the global economy to arrive at the same incorruptible value
standard.

Bitcoin is seen by some as the catalyst for the evolution of global monetary
systems toward something that would resemble stabilizing a currency versus an
optimally chosen basket of commodity prices. Some believe that Nash’s writings
from 1960’s may have even predicted the emergence of something like Bitcoin.
Nash wrote: “Here I am thinking of a politically neutral form of a technological
utility. To be quite respectable, in a Gresham-advised sense, money needs only
to be as good as other material commodities that might be hoarded.”

Coincidentally, over the last several years, a global consensus over the nature
of Bitcoin has slowly been converging on phrases like “digital gold”. Bitcoin
has all the characteristics to acquire a global monetary premium, much the same
as gold. The relation between scarcity and new supply is actually more important
than scarcity of supply. In the next several years, bitcoin’s stock-to-flow
ratio, the relation of its scarcity to its new supply, will drop below that of
gold. Bitcoin’s annual inflation will continue to decrease. Many believe that
during this time, bitcoin will draw growing interest as an inflation hedge from
many around the world.

It is plausible that if Bitcoin continues seeing infrastructural improvements
and growing place in the market, central banks and fiat currencies will
themselves be forced to compete with Bitcoin in the future for relevance. It is
likely that citizens of nation-states will put pressure on their central bank to
print less money of a superior quality, resulting in a slower rate of
inflation. If this were to occur, Bitcoin would likely usher similar effects
to value stabilizing a currency versus an optimally chosen basket of commodity
prices, without ever implementing an actual ICPI. This would force fiat
currencies closer to Nash’s vision of Ideal Money. Nash’s goal is believed by
some to be near, as Bitcoin represents competition to the nation-state control
of money for the first time in centuries.

***

#### Fourth Theory: Bitcoin is an information and energy black hole that will
result in the evolution of traditional money

**Tenets**: Perfect information and computational markets. Bitcoin is fractal
and the sum of its forks. Peer-to-peer, censorship-resistant, borderless, cheap
transfer of value, without middlemen. High on-chain throughput and on-chain
utility.

> “Bitcoin isn’t money. It’s past money, which is scary because it’s actually a
> new paradigm. We’ve never had access to perfect market information before, so
the concept of money will have to evolve to fit reality, not stay the same
because legacy deems it so.” — anonymous

<span class="figcaption_hack">Bitcoin forks</span>

<span class="figcaption_hack">Bitcoin forks</span>

There is also a niche number of individuals, the most prominent of which are
[George Gilder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Gilder), author of a number
of books on the monetary system and capitalism, [Andrew
DeSantis](http://www.twitter.com/desantis), former engineer at the Bitcoin
startup
[21.co](https://techcrunch.com/2015/05/18/what-is-21-co-really-doing-an-excerpt-from-digital-gold/),
now earn.com, and [Mark Wilcox](http://www.twitter.com/mwilcox), Director of
Strategy at [Nyriad](http://nyriad.com/), that discuss Bitcoin primarily as
interpreted by [Claude
Shannon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claude_E._Shannon)’s information theory.
In simplistic terms, information is defined as surprise under information
theory.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Claude Shannon, the founder of information theory</span>

This group believes Bitcoin is a breakthrough in information theory because it
allows anyone to conduct verifiable, timestamped, tamper-proof and transparent
transactions without any third parties. Information theory says creativity
requires a stable medium to experience fractal growth, and these individuals
view Bitcoin as an extremely stable medium for doing so. In Knowledge and Power,
Gilder argues “it takes a low-entropy carrier (no surprises) to bear
high-entropy information (full of surprisal).” This camp also agrees with
Bitcoin’s deflationary policy because they view capitalism and technological
progress as a fundamentally deflationary system.

Similarly to Bitcoin Cash supporters, these individuals favor pushing Bitcoin to
its limits to maximize the utility of an open data layer, and they are not fond
of a future of Bitcoin where throughput is limited so that all users can verify
transactions with a full node. This group views one use case of Bitcoin as an
[oracle machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oracle_machine) to prove that a
specific piece of data existed at a given point in time, and the bitcoin
scripting language as much more capable than Ethereum in the long run due to the
[parallel](https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_memoranda/2008/RM1361.pdf)
nature of Bitcoin in comparison to the current serial execution forced by
contracts on the Ethereum platform. They also believe Bitcoin will “wake up” in
the future as a superintelligent AI and allow [intelligence
augmentation](https://jods.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/issue3-case) for humans.

This group views Bitcoin as a platform to re-build computer software and the web
upon. For example, they are interested in the parallels between [Ted
Nelson](http://ted.hyperland.com/)’s Project [Xanadu](http://xanadu.com/), the
first hypertext project, and Bitcoin. Project Xanadu was envisioned to bring
about a highly interconnected, parallel universe of documents for reading,
writing, learning, and earning through hypertext, “non-sequential writing — text
that branches and allows choices to the reader, best read at an interactive
screen.” Xanadu was to operate through worldwide distributed servers and
facilitate micro-transactions across the web.

As discussed in “[Blockchain Control Flow](http://markwilcox.com/articles/01/),”
Ethereum has made design decisions that allow the network to have control over
contract execution, and thus users’ money. Wilcox writes “For a peer-to-peer
network to be politically decentralised, it needs to have decentralised control,
so we should at all times try to keep control completely in the private
section.” He also writes that the “limitations” of Bitcoin as cited by Vitalik
Buterin in the [Ethereum
Whitepaper](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White-Paper) are *protections*
not limitations.

Individuals within this camp generally have negative opinions towards the
Lightning Network and other secondary-layer solutions. DeSantis
[states](https://twitter.com/desantis/status/958428140686241795) the “Lightning
Network makes the base chain strict, or predictable,” and thus reduces Bitcoin’s
information theoretic value by constraining experimentation space and reducing
the chances of surprise discovery. Wilcox
[views](https://twitter.com/mwilcox/status/960470198389108737) the Lightning
Network as “a scam designed to function as an abstraction layer between you and
the miners.”

When Wilcox discusses transaction processing, he is referring to verifying a
transaction and hashing it into the merkle tree. Transaction processing can
refer to almost anything, and he
[proposed](https://twitter.com/mwilcox/status/945453426619465728) a thesis that
the same economic incentives that allowed Bitcoin’s hashrate to grow
exponentially over the last nine years could be used to exponentially grow
transaction processing, which is currently done serially on a CPU.

Nyriad, the company Wilcox co-founded, created the
[Nsulate](http://www.nyriad.com/products/nsulate/) for the Square Kilometre
Array project, the world’s largest radio telescope. The Nsulate innovatively
uses the GPU as a storage controller and makes processing and storing data the
same thing. It has built in blockchain support through cryptographic hash
algorithms, which would allow miners to process transactions in parallel.

Many of Wilcox’s arguments, therefore, are based on seeing Bitcoin as a platform
to enable competitive general purpose computational markets where users and
companies submit transaction puzzles via scripts for miners to compete to solve
using GPUs and write-on chain to seek rewards. Transaction puzzles can mean
nearly anything here, from deep learning to CRISPR searches.

With on-chain computational markets on Bitcoin, a user looking to submit
computations to miners will care a lot about efficiency, to get the most
computation per unit of reward they are including in a puzzle, and hashrate, to
ensure the system they are submitting to is as secure as possible.

It is worth noting that similar projects can be built on secondary and third
layer solutions, as well. For example, a “Layer 3” project called
[Fabric](http://twitter.com/FabricProtocol) Protocol, led by former
[Blockstream](http://twitter.com/Blockstream) engineer Eric Martindale, is
aiming to become a distributed supercomputer and decentralized operating system
using Bitcoin as a trust anchor, a Fabric sidechain, and payment channels.

Wilcox and DeSantis typically argue against the traditional supply and demand
outlook of economic markets for blockchains, as described in the tweet above
insinuating that hashrate will be price in the future. Wilcox discusses the
implications of Proof of Work for transaction processing and scalability in his
blog, including [Fundamental
Misconceptions](http://markwilcox.com/articles/03/). Computational markets
sitting atop Bitcoin are particularly likely to expand if they prove to achieve
cheaper and more efficient computation than established behemoths of the
industry.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Source: [Twitter](https://twitter.com/mwilcox/status/915781401487671296)</span>

#### **Conclusion**

The four schools of thought presented in this article do not necessarily
contradict one another, and, in fact, oftentimes overlap. In particular, the
First Theory — Bitcoin being like a digital gold — and the Third Theory —
Bitcoin leading to Nash’s Ideal Money — run pretty much in parallel to one
another, with the key difference being that the latter states that fiat
currencies survive and adjust, while the former states that hyperbitcoinization
will disrupt fiat currencies entirely, with everyone eventually demanding
payment for their goods, services, and labor in bitcoin.

Similarly, the Second Theory — Bitcoin Cash being a dominant peer-to-peer
digital cash — and the Fourth Theory — Bitcoin being the key element in further
developing information theory — have many of the same supporting points and
arguments, with the key difference being that the latter is not fork-biased and
believes that any possible fork that can happen, will happen, and they will
compete against each other.


_Originally posted on [Hackernoon](https://hackernoon.com/the-many-faces-of-bitcoin-1c298570d191)_.
